# Rapid ageing and species identification of natural mosquitoes for malaria surveillance

Doreen J. Siria, Roger Sanou, Joshua Mitton, Emmanuel P. Mwanga, Abdoulaye Niang, Issiaka Sare, Paul C.D. Johnson, Geraldine Foster, Adrien M.G. Belem, Klaas Wynne, Roderick Murray-Smith, Heather M. Ferguson, Mario González-Jiménez, Simon A. Babayan, Abdoulaye Diabaté, Fredros O. Okumu, and Francesco Baldini

**The malaria parasite, which is transmitted by several *Anopheles* mosquito species, requires more time to reach its human-transmissible stage than the average lifespan of mosquito vectors. Monitoring the species-specific age structure of mosquito populations is critical to evaluating the impact of vector control interventions on malaria risk. We developed a rapid, cost-effective surveillance method based on deep learning of mid-infrared spectra of mosquito cuticle that simultaneously identifies the species and age class of three main malaria vectors in nature. Using spectra from over 40,000 ecologically and genetically diverse *An. gambiae*, *An. arabiensis*, and *An. coluzzii* females, we developed a deep learning model that was able to simultaneously predict mosquito species and age class. This model learned the age of new populations with minimal sampling effort. Additionally the model was able to detect the impact of simulated control interventions on mosquito populations, measured as a shift in their age structures. In the future, we anticipate our method can be applied to other arthropod vector-borne diseases.**
